Okay, we're rolling for just the last few questions, I guess. Okay, another
thing that you've worked with in your career in science fiction is President of
the Science Fiction Writers of America. What are your feelings about that? Do
you think that has a useful function? I think that professional organizations
have a considerable function. I mean, all of them, not just the Science Fiction
Writers of America. I think they also divert an awful lot of energy that could
better be used in some other way, but I don't see how to have them and have the
benefits without having them. Well, at the moment, I've just recently become the
president of a thing called World SF, which is an international organization of
people who are professionally connected with science fiction. They had a meeting
in Italy last summer, and I couldn't go there. And while I wasn't looking, they
elected me president, so I'm stuck with that. It's taking quite a lot of my
time. But I think that they are useful. It's useful for people in any profession
to be able to be in some sort of contact with their peers. And I think
particularly in science fiction, since it's worldwide, and there are so many
restraints in the way of communication, that the professional organizations
serve a very important function. You served one term as president, correct? No,
I served one term as president. If I had been sensible enough to stop after one,
I would have been quite happy with it. I served two. Oh, okay. Okay, switching
one more. The first term was no worse than a bad cold. The second term got very
difficult. Does it get political in that respect? No, it's just that there are a
lot of frustrations involved for writers, and they accumulate. And the
frustrations involving the science fiction writers of America, the organization,
began to accumulate around my second term. And science fiction writers are a
very clamorous, argumentative bunch. I love them, but they are hard to get along
with sometimes.
Okay, just to switch direction here. Again, I can't think of anybody who can
better answer this question. Can an unpublished author with a reasonable amount
of talent make it today in the science fiction field? Would you have any
particular advice to a would-be science fiction writer? The science fiction
field has always, accepting no times at all, been very hospitable to new
writers. As soon as anybody turns up with a good story, he's one of the
fraternity. He or she is one of the fraternity. Most of the most recent converts
to writing science fiction have been female, at sea. And there are two pieces of
advice I give. I have a sort of a set speech, as a matter of fact, answering the
two questions on how to be a writer and how to make a living out of it. The
question, how to be a writer, is answered by, you sit down and write. Now,
there's no other way of doing it. Taking a course in writing won't do it.
Telling your girlfriend, friend, you plan to be a writer won't do it. You have
to sit down and you have to put words on paper and you have to finish the story.
Then, how do you get to be published and successful? You take the stories you've
written and you mail them to somebody who might buy them. There's no better way
of doing that. There are many fantasies that people have that if they could just
get an influential friend in a publishing house to do it for them, or if they
had an agent who could do it for them, that it would all be made easier. But the
fact is that almost no writers become professionals except by doing just what
I've said. Every once in a while, someone finds a shortcut, but that's sort of
like being hit by lightning. You can't count on them. That's all there is to it.
You write and you send it off and you keep on doing that until people start
publishing it. Maybe they never will, in which case you've wasted your time, but
there is no good way of doing it in any other fashion. But with a reasonable
amount of talent and discipline, there is room if you keep at it. There is
always room. It is a very hospitable field. At the moment, I think that, well,
up until maybe two years ago, I would have advised any new writer to try writing
a novel because the demand exceeded the supply. At the moment, I think I would
advise them to try writing short stories because it's quite obvious if you look
at any of the magazines that they're pretty hungry for short stories. Otherwise,
they wouldn't print some of the ones they do. So, if I were a new writer anxious
to write science fiction, I would write short stories. Then I would go to the
newsstand on the corner and I would copy out the addresses of the magazines and
send the stories off to them one after another until somebody bought them or
until the stories, the manuscripts were worn out. Okay. I'm not sure you care to
answer this next question, but are there any particular contemporary authors,
say, that have started in the last, oh, five to ten years? Or some that you
particularly think are good or that you like? There are a lot of them. There are
so many of them that I hate to answer the question. Some of the ones that I've
watched most closely are people like Gene Wolfe, who I think is very talented.
He's been writing, I guess, a little more than five years, but not much more.
And a number of women who have come into the field. The ones I like best have
been a little longer than five or ten years, like James Tiptree Jr., which is a
pen name for a woman named Alice Sheldon, or Ursula Le Guin, or Joanna Russ. But
there are a lot. So many that I like, as I like them for different things, I
hate to say that I like one better than another. Yeah, that would be difficult.
I agree. Okay, let me end up by coming back to you. What are you presently
working on? What kind of books are you going to be working on in the near
future? Well, I've just finished a whole bunch of books. I made a serious
mistake and signed more contracts than I had realized. Therefore, at the
beginning of last year, I discovered I owed eight books for delivery in 1980.
Fortunately, some of them were non-books, two anthologies and a collection of
previously uncollected shorter stories and so on. Quite a few of them had been
largely completed before the year began. But nevertheless, I actually delivered
six books last year. One more so far this year, and I've got two to go because
I've signed a new contract since then. And the book I've just delivered, well,
the most recent book out is a non-fiction book on movies, science fiction
movies, called Science Fiction Studies in Film, which I wrote in collaboration
with my son, who had a film degree from Syracuse University. And I figured he
knew everything I didn't know about film itself. And the next one out, I think,
will be something called Frederik Pohl's Favorite Stories, which is a sort of
retrospective anthology of the stories I was most interested in in the 39 years
I was an editor. And the next one after that is a novel called The Cool War,
which Ballantine Del Rey will bring out sometime in April. Or May, I'm not sure
which. Is there anything you see or you're toying with, any kinds of works that
would be any kind of radical departure from the things you've done in the past?
There's a novel that I have not got very far with, which is quite a radical
departure. And I haven't signed a contract on it. I've been fiddling with it in
my spare time thinking about it. But I really don't like to talk about work that
I haven't finished yet. I'm not, maybe it's superstition, but it seems to me
that it works out better if I do it all inside my own head. Don't talk too much
about it. But there is one which I think will be, well, I don't know. I hate to
predict, but I think it will be my favorite novel when I get around to doing it.
Hmm. I was kind of curious. I understand that you've had a background in ancient
history. Were you, I guess, what, the Roman Emperor Tiberius in ancient Rome? I
have a background in anything. I'm a high school dropout. I'm self-educated. But
I was recently notified that I'd been nominated for an honor, and they asked for
some background information about education and so on. So where I had all the
spaces for education, I wrote an autodidact, which means I didn't go to school.
I taught myself. But I have been very interested in history, all kinds of
history, but particularly ancient history. Well, there are some periods that are
interesting more than others, and the Romans were part of the most interesting
periods to me. And I did write a book on the Emperor Tiberius, which caused the
Encyclopedia Britannica to come to me when they wanted a new biography of
Tiberius for the new edition of the Encyclopedia. So I became their authority on
the Roman Emperor. And I have a good deal of interest in science as a spectator
sport. I spend a lot of time reading journals and magazines and publications
that belong to. New York Academy of Sciences, the British Interplanetary
Society, and the American Astronautical Society, and the AAAS, and so on. And so
there's a lot that interests me, but I cannot say that I have special
qualifications in any of those areas. Have you ever considered writing a pure
fantasy novel? Not really. I've written some short fantasy pieces at one time or
another, but I'm not terribly well satisfied with them. Other people do that far
better than I do. Okay, I just have one more question. I understand that you go
around giving lectures or speaking to various organizations and so forth quite a
bit these days. Could you tell us what you talk about and what kinds of
organizations you speak before? Well, let's see. Yesterday I spoke to Princeton
University on science fiction. The day before that I spoke to the Association of
American Publishers on the future of electronic and other non-print
publications. And it sort of goes like that. I talk about either science fiction
or the future. I don't lecture nearly as much as I used to because I found that
I got very tired of the sound of my own voice, so I've been limiting it pretty
carefully, but I still do it. So last year I spoke more than I intended. This
year I hope to limit my appearances of that sort to maybe 15 or 20. But some of
your lectures have a futurist topic or tone to them, don't they? That's right,
yeah. I do talk about the future. I'm a chairman member of the World Future
Society, and I've been involved in all three of their world general assemblies
as a participant on the program, section chairman in two of them. And I have on
the back burner a book on future studies, which I may one day get around to
finishing. Actually, I finished it twice and decided I didn't like it both
times.
But I'm primarily, first and foremost, a science fiction writer. It's in the
blood, and there's no way I can change it. Okay, Mr. Pohl, that is excellent.
I'm going to give you, David wants to ask you something for just a second. Thank
you.